Module 5
File Management
What is a File ?
A file can be defined as a data structure which stores the sequence of records. Files are 
stored in a file system, which may exist on a disk or in the main memory. Files can be 
simple (plain text) or complex (specially-formatted).
The collection of files is known as Directory. The collection of directories at the different 
levels, is known as File System.
Attributes of the File
1.Name
Every file carries a name by which the file is recognized in the file system. One 
directory cannot have two files with the same name.

2.Identifier
Along with the name, Each File has its own extension which identifies the type of the 
file. For example, a text file has the extension .txt, A video file can have the 
extension .mp4.
3.Type
In a File System, the Files are classified in different types such as video files, audio 
files, text files, executable files, etc.
4.Location
In the File System, there are several locations on which, the files can be stored. Each 
file carries its location as its attribute.
5.Size
The Size of the File is one of its most important attribute. By size of the file, we mean 
the number of bytes acquired by the file in the memory.
6.Protection
The Admin of the computer may want the different protections for the different files. 
Therefore each file carries its own set of permissions to the different group of Users.
7.Time and Date
Every file carries a time stamp which contains the time and date on which the file is last 
modified.
Operations on the File
There are various operations which can be implemented on a file. We will see all of 
them in detail.
1.Create
Creation of the file is the most important operation on the file. Different types of files 
are created by different methods for example text editors are used to create a text file, 
word processors are used to create a word file and Image editors are used to create the 
image files.
2.Write
Writing the file is different from creating the file. The OS maintains a write pointer for 
every file which points to the position in the file from which, the data needs to be 
written.

3.Read
Every file is opened in three different modes : Read, Write and append. A Read pointer 
is maintained by the OS, pointing to the position up to which, the data has been read.
4.Re-position
Re-positioning is simply moving the file pointers forward or backward depending upon 
the user's requirement. It is also called as seeking.
5.Delete
Deleting the file will not only delete all the data stored inside the file, It also deletes all 
the attributes of the file. The space which is allocated to the file will now become 
available and can be allocated to the other files.
6.Truncate
Truncating is simply deleting the file except deleting attributes. The file is not 
completely deleted although the information stored inside the file get replaced.
File Access Methods
Let's look at various ways to access files stored in secondary memory.
Sequential Access

Most of the operating systems access the file sequentially. In other words, we can say 
that most of the files need to be accessed sequentially by the operating system.
In sequential access, the OS read the file word by word. A pointer is maintained which 
initially points to the base address of the file. If the user wants to read first word of the 
file then the pointer provides that word to the user and increases its value by 1 word. 
This process continues till the end of the file.
Modern word systems do provide the concept of direct access and indexed access but 
the most used method is sequential access due to the fact that most of the files such as 
text files, audio files, video files, etc need to be sequentially accessed.
Direct Access
The Direct Access is mostly required in the case of database systems. In most of the 
cases, we need filtered information from the database. The sequential access can be 
very slow and inefficient in such cases.
Suppose every block of the storage stores 4 records and we know that the record we 
needed is stored in 10th block. In that case, the sequential access will not be 
implemented because it will traverse all the blocks in order to access the needed 
record.
Direct access will give the required result despite of the fact that the operating system 
has to perform some complex tasks such as determining the desired block number. 
However, that is generally implemented in database applications.

Indexed Access
If a file can be sorted on any of the filed then an index can be assigned to a group of 
certain records. However, A particular record can be accessed by its index. The index is 
nothing but the address of a record in the file.
In index accessing, searching in a large database became very quick and easy but we 
need to have some extra space in the memory to store the index value.
Directory Structure
What is a directory?
Directory can be defined as the listing of the related files on the disk. The directory may 
store some or the entire file attributes.
To get the benefit of different file systems on the different operating systems, A hard 
disk can be divided into the number of partitions of different sizes. The partitions are 
also called volumes or mini disks.

Each partition must have at least one directory in which, all the files of the partition can 
be listed. A directory entry is maintained for each file in the directory which stores all 
the information related to that file.
A directory can be viewed as a file which contains the Meta data of the bunch of files.
Every Directory supports a number of common operations on the file:
1. File Creation
2. Search for the file
3. File deletion
4. Renaming the file
5. Traversing Files
6. Listing of files
Single Level Directory
The simplest method is to have one big list of all the files on the disk. The entire system 
will contain only one directory which is supposed to mention all the files present in the 
file system. The directory contains one entry per each file present on the file system.

This type of directories can be used for a simple system.
Advantages
1. Implementation is very simple.
2. If the sizes of the files are very small then the searching becomes faster.
3. File creation, searching, deletion is very simple since we have only one directory.
Disadvantages
1. We cannot have two files with the same name.
2. The directory may be very big therefore searching for a file may take so much 
time.
3. Protection cannot be implemented for multiple users.
4. There are no ways to group same kind of files.
5. Choosing the unique name for every file is a bit complex and limits the number 
of files in the system because most of the Operating System limits the number of 
characters used to construct the file name.
Two Level Directory
In two level directory systems, we can create a separate directory for each user. There 
is one master directory which contains separate directories dedicated to each user. For 
each user, there is a different directory present at the second level, containing group of 
user's file. The system doesn't let a user to enter in the other user's directory without 
permission.

Characteristics of two level directory system
1. Each files has a path name as /User-name/directory-name/
2. Different users can have the same file name.
3. Searching becomes more efficient as only one user's list needs to be traversed.
4. The same kind of files cannot be grouped into a single directory for a particular 
user.
Every Operating System maintains a variable as PWD which contains the present 
directory name (present user name) so that the searching can be done appropriately.
Tree Structured Directory
In Tree structured directory system, any directory entry can either be a file or sub 
directory. Tree structured directory system overcomes the drawbacks of two level 
directory system. The similar kind of files can now be grouped in one directory.
Each user has its own directory and it cannot enter in the other user's directory. 
However, the user has the permission to read the root's data but he cannot write or 
modify this. Only administrator of the system has the complete access of root directory.
Searching is more efficient in this directory structure. The concept of current working 
directory is used. A file can be accessed by two types of path, either relative or 
absolute.
Absolute path is the path of the file with respect to the root directory of the system 
while relative path is the path with respect to the current working directory of the 

system. In tree structured directory systems, the user is given the privilege to create 
the files as well as directories.
Permissions on the file and directory
A tree structured directory system may consist of various levels therefore there is a set 
of permissions assigned to each file and directory.
The permissions are R W X which are regarding reading, writing and the execution of 
the files or directory. The permissions are assigned to three types of users: owner, 
group and others.
There is a identification bit which differentiate between directory and file. For a 
directory, it is d and for a file, it is dot (.)
Acyclic-Graph Structured Directories
The tree structured directory system doesn't allow the same file to exist in multiple 
directories therefore sharing is major concern in tree structured directory system. We 
can provide sharing by making the directory an acyclic graph. In this system, two or 
more directory entry can point to the same file or sub directory. That file or sub 
directory is shared between the two directory entries.
These kinds of directory graphs can be made using links or aliases. We can have 
multiple paths for a same file. Links can either be symbolic (logical) or hard link 
(physical).
If a file gets deleted in acyclic graph structured directory system, then

1. In the case of soft link, the file just gets deleted and we are left with a dangling 
pointer.
2. In the case of hard link, the actual file will be deleted only if all the references to it 
gets deleted.
File Systems
File system is the part of the operating system which is responsible for file 
management. It provides a mechanism to store the data and access to the file contents 
including data and programs. Some Operating systems treats everything as a file for 
example Ubuntu.
The File system takes care of the following issues
o
File Structure
We have seen various data structures in which the file can be stored. The task of 
the file system is to maintain an optimal file structure.
o
Recovering Free space
Whenever a file gets deleted from the hard disk, there is a free space created in 
the disk. There can be many such spaces which need to be recovered in order to 
reallocate them to other files.
o
disk space assignment to the files

The major concern about the file is deciding where to store the files on the hard 
disk. There are various disks scheduling algorithm which will be covered later in 
this tutorial.
o
tracking data location
A File may or may not be stored within only one block. It can be stored in the 
non contiguous blocks on the disk. We need to keep track of all the blocks on 
which the part of the files reside.
File System Structure
File System provide efficient access to the disk by allowing data to be stored, located 
and retrieved in a convenient way. A file System must be able to store the file, locate 
the file and retrieve the file.
Most of the Operating Systems use layering approach for every task including file 
systems. Every layer of the file system is responsible for some activities.
The image shown below, elaborates how the file system is divided in different layers, 
and also the functionality of each layer.

o
When an application program asks for a file, the first request is directed to the 
logical file system. The logical file system contains the Meta data of the file and 
directory structure. If the application program doesn't have the required 
permissions of the file then this layer will throw an error. Logical file systems 
also verify the path to the file.
o
Generally, files are divided into various logical blocks. Files are to be stored in 
the hard disk and to be retrieved from the hard disk. Hard disk is divided into 
various tracks and sectors. Therefore, in order to store and retrieve the files, the 

logical blocks need to be mapped to physical blocks. This mapping is done by File 
organization module. It is also responsible for free space management.
o
Once File organization module decided which physical block the application 
program needs, it passes this information to basic file system. The basic file 
system is responsible for issuing the commands to I/O control in order to fetch 
those blocks.
o
I/O controls contain the codes by using which it can access hard disk. These 
codes are known as device drivers. I/O controls are also responsible for handling 
interrupts.
Directory Implementation
There is the number of algorithms by using which, the directories can be implemented. 
However, the selection of an appropriate directory implementation algorithm may 
significantly affect the performance of the system.
The directory implementation algorithms are classified according to the data structure 
they are using. There are mainly two algorithms which are used in these days.
1. Linear List
In this algorithm, all the files in a directory are maintained as singly lined list. Each file 
contains the pointers to the data blocks which are assigned to it and the next file in the 
directory.
Characteristics
1. When a new file is created, then the entire list is checked whether the new file 
name is matching to a existing file name or not. In case, it doesn't exist, the file 
can be created at the beginning or at the end. Therefore, searching for a unique 
name is a big concern because traversing the whole list takes time.
2. The list needs to be traversed in case of every operation (creation, deletion, 
updating, etc) on the files therefore the systems become inefficient.

2. Hash Table
To overcome the drawbacks of singly linked list implementation of directories, there is 
an alternative approach that is hash table. This approach suggests to use hash table 
along with the linked lists.
A key-value pair for each file in the directory gets generated and stored in the hash 
table. The key can be determined by applying the hash function on the file name while 
the key points to the corresponding file stored in the directory.
Now, searching becomes efficient due to the fact that now, entire list will not be 
searched on every operating. Only hash table entries are checked using the key and if 
an entry found then the corresponding file will be fetched using the value.
Inode
In UNIX based operating systems, each file is indexed by an Inode. Inode are the 
special disk block which is created with the creation of the file system. The number of 
files or directories in a file system depends on the number of Inodes in the file system.

An Inode includes the following information
1. Attributes (permissions, time stamp, ownership details, etc) of the file
2. A number of direct blocks which contains the pointers to first 12 blocks of the 
file.
3. A single indirect pointer which points to an index block. If the file cannot be 
indexed entirely by the direct blocks then the single indirect pointer is used.
4. A double indirect pointer which points to a disk block that is a collection of the 
pointers to the disk blocks which are index blocks. Double index pointer is used if 
the file is too big to be indexed entirely by the direct blocks as well as the single 
indirect pointer.
5. A triple index pointer that points to a disk block that is a collection of pointers. 
Each of the pointers is separately pointing to a disk block which also contains a 
collection of pointers which are separately pointing to an index block that 
contains the pointers to the file blocks.
