Module 1
Operating system overview
An Operating System (OS) is an interface between a computer user and computer hardware.
An operating system is a software which performs all the basic tasks like file management,
memory management, process management, handling input and output, and controlling
peripheral devices such as disk drives and printers.
Some popular Operating Systems include Linux Operating System, Windows Operating
System, VMS, OS/400, AIX, z/OS, etc.
Definition
An operating system is a program that acts as an interface between the user and the computer
hardware and controls the execution of all kinds of programs.
Following are some of important functions of an operating System.
●Memory Management
●Processor Management
●Device Management
●File Management
●Security
●Control over system performance
●Job accounting
●Error detecting aids

●Coordination between other software and users
Memory Management
Memory management refers to management of Primary Memory or Main Memory. Main
memory is a large array of words or bytes where each word or byte has its own address.
Main memory provides a fast storage that can be accessed directly by the CPU. For a program
to be executed, it must in the main memory. An Operating System does the following activities
for memory management −
●Keeps tracks of primary memory, i.e., what part of it are in use by whom, what part
are not in use.
●In multiprogramming, the OS decides which process will get memory when and how
much.
●Allocates the memory when a process requests it to do so.
●De-allocates the memory when a process no longer needs it or has been terminated.
Processor Management
In multiprogramming environment, the OS decides which process gets the processor when
and for how much time. This function is called process scheduling. An Operating System
does the following activities for processor management −
●Keeps tracks of processor and status of process. The program responsible for this task
is known as traffic controller.
●Allocates the processor (CPU) to a process.
●De-allocates processor when a process is no longer required.
Device Management
An Operating System manages device communication via their respective drivers. It does the
following activities for device management −
●Keeps tracks of all devices. Program responsible for this task is known as the I/O
controller.
●Decides which process gets the device when and for how much time.
●Allocates the device in the efficient way.
●De-allocates devices.
File Management
A file system is normally organized into directories for easy navigation and usage. These
directories may contain files and other directions.

An Operating System does the following activities for file management −
●Keeps track of information, location, uses, status etc. The collective facilities are often
known as file system.
●Decides who gets the resources.
●Allocates the resources.
●De-allocates the resources.
Other Important Activities
Following are some of the important activities that an Operating System performs −
●Security − By means of password and similar other techniques, it prevents
unauthorized access to programs and data.
●Control over system performance − Recording delays between request for a service
and response from the system.
●Job accounting − Keeping track of time and resources used by various jobs and users.
●Error detecting aids − Production of dumps, traces, error messages, and other
debugging and error detecting aids.
●Coordination between other softwares and users − Coordination and assignment of
compilers, interpreters, assemblers and other software to the various users of the
computer systems.
Objectives of Operating System
The objectives of the operating system are −
●To make the computer system convenient to use in an efficient manner.
●To hide the details of the hardware resources from the users.
●To provide users a convenient interface to use the computer system.
●To act as an intermediary between the hardware and its users, making it easier for the
users to access and use other resources.
●To manage the resources of a computer system.
●To keep track of who is using which resource, granting resource requests, and
mediating conflicting requests from different programs and users.
●To provide efficient and fair sharing of resources among users and programs.

Evolution of Operating Systems:
1. Serial processing 
2. Batch processing 
3. Multiprogramming 
4. Multitasking or time sharing System 
1. Serial Processing: 
● Early computer from late 1940 to the mid 1950. 
● The programmer interacted directly with the computer hardware. 
● These machine are called bare machine as they don't have OS. 
● Every computer system is programmed in its machine language. 
● Uses Punch Card, paper tapes and language translator These system presented two major
problems. 1. Scheduling 2. Set up time: Scheduling: Used sign up sheet to reserve machine
time. A user may sign up for an hour but finishes his job in 45 minutes. This would result in
wasted computer idle time, also the user might run into the problem not finish his job in alloted
time. Set up time: A single program involves: 
● Loading compiler and source program in memory 
● Saving the compiled program (object code) 
● Loading and linking together object program and common function Each of these steps
involves the mounting or dismounting tapes on setting up punch cards. If an error occur user
had to go the beginning of the set up sequence. Thus, a considerable amount of time is spent
in setting up the program to run. This mode of operation is turned as serial processing
,reflecting the fact that users access the computer in series. 
2. Simple Batch Processing: 
● Early computers were very expensive, and therefore it was important to maximize processor
utilization. 
● The wasted time due to scheduling and setup time in Serial Processing was unacceptable. 
● To improve utilization, the concept of a batch operating system was developed. 
● Batch is defined as a group of jobs with similar needs. The operating system allows users to
form batches. Computer executes each batch sequentially, processing all jobs of a batch
considering them as a single process called batch processing. The central idea behind the
simple batch-processing scheme is the use of a piece of software known as the monitor. With
this type of OS, the user no longer has direct access to the processor. Instead, the user submits
the job on cards or tape to a computer operator, who batches the jobs together sequentially and
places the entire batch on an input device, for use by the monitor. Each program is constructed
to branch back to the monitor when it completes processing, at which point the monitor
automatically begins loading the next program. 

With a batch operating system, processor time alternates between execution of user programs
and execution of the monitor. There have been two sacrifices: Some main memory is now 
given over to the monitor and some processor time is consumed by the monitor. Both of 
these are forms of overhead. 
3. Multiprogrammed Batch System: 
A single program cannot keep either CPU or I/O devices busy at all times. 
Multiprogramming increases CPU utilization by organizing jobs in such a manner that CPU 
has always one job to execute. 
If computer is required to run several programs at the same time, the processor could be kept 
busy for the most of the time by switching its attention from one program to the next. 
Additionally I/O transfer could overlap the processor activity i.e, while one program is 
awaiting for an I/O transfer, another program can use the processor. 
So CPU never sits idle or if comes in idle state then after a very small time it is again busy. 
4. Multitasking or Time Sharing System: 
● Multiprogramming didn't provide the user interaction with the computer system. 
● Time sharing or Multitasking is a logical extension of Multiprogramming that provides user
interaction. 
● There are more than one user interacting the system at the same time 
● The switching of CPU between two users is so fast that it gives the impression to user that
he is only working on the system but actually it is shared among different users. 
● CPU bound is divided into different time slots depending upon the number of users using
the system. 
● just as multiprogramming allows the processor to handle multiple batch jobs at a time,
multiprogramming can also be used to handle multiple interactive jobs. In this latter case, the
technique is referred to as time sharing, because processor time is shared among multiple users
● A multitasking system uses CPU scheduling and multiprogramming to provide each user
with a small portion of a time shared computer. Each user has at least one separate program in
memory. 
● Multitasking are more complex than multiprogramming and must provide a mechanism for
jobs synchronization and communication and it may ensure that system does not go in
deadlock. Although batch processing is still in use but most of the system today available uses
the concept of multitasking and Multiprogramming. 
Operating System Structure
Operating system can be implemented with the help of various structures. The 
structure of the OS depends mainly on how the various common components of the 
operating system are interconnected and melded into the kernel. Depending on this we
have following structures of the operating system:

Simple structure:
Such operating systems do not have well defined structure and are small, simple and 
limited systems. The interfaces and levels of functionality are not well separated. MS-
DOS is an example of such operating system. In MS-DOS application programs are 
able to access the basic I/O routines. These types of operating system cause the entire 
system to crash if one of the user programs fails.
Diagram of the structure of MS-DOS is shown below.
The operating system is split into various layers In the layered operating system and each of
the layers have different functionalities. This type of operating system was created as an
improvement over the early monolithic systems.
1. Layered Structure:-
Why Layering in Operating System?
Layering provides a distinct advantage in an operating system. All the layers can be defined
separately and interact with each other as required. Also, it is easier to create, maintain and
update the system if it is done in the form of layers. Change in one layer specification does not
affect the rest of the layers.
Each of the layers in the operating system can only interact with the layers that are above and
below it. The lowest layer handles the hardware and the uppermost layer deals with the user
applications.
Layers in Layered Operating System
There are six layers in the layered operating system. A diagram demonstrating these layers is
as follows:

Details about the six layers are:
Hardware
This layer interacts with the system hardware and coordinates with all the peripheral devices
used such as printer, mouse, keyboard, scanner etc. The hardware layer is the lowest layer in
the layered operating system architecture.
CPU Scheduling
This layer deals with scheduling the processes for the CPU. There are many scheduling queues
that are used to handle processes. When the processes enter the system, they are put into the
job queue. The processes that are ready to execute in the main memory are kept in the ready
queue.
Memory Management
Memory management deals with memory and the moving of processes from disk to primary
memory for execution and back again. This is handled by the third layer of the operating
system.
Process Management
This layer is responsible for managing the processes i.e assigning the processor to a process at
a time. This is known as process scheduling. The different algorithms used for process
scheduling are FCFS (first come first served), SJF (shortest job first), priority scheduling,
round-robin scheduling etc.
I/O Buffer
I/O devices are very important in the computer systems. They provide users with the means of
interacting with the system. This layer handles the buffers for the I/O devices and makes sure
that they work correctly.

User Programs
This is the highest layer in the layered operating system. This layer deals with the many user
programs and applications that run in an operating system such as word processors, games,
browsers etc.
Advantages :
There are several advantages to this design :
1. Modularity :
This design promotes modularity as each layer performs only the tasks it is 
scheduled to perform.
2. Easy debugging :
As the layers are discrete so it is very easy to debug. Suppose an error 
occurs in the CPU scheduling layer, so the developer can only search that 
particular layer to debug, unlike the Monolithic system in which all the 
services are present together.
3. Easy update :
A modification made in a particular layer will not affect the other layers.
4. No direct access to hardware :
The hardware layer is the innermost layer present in the design. So a user 
can use the services of hardware but cannot directly modify or access it, 
unlike the Simple system in which the user had direct access to the 
hardware.
5. Abstraction :
Every layer is concerned with its own functions. So the functions and 
implementations of the other layers are abstract to it.
Disadvantages :
Though this system has several advantages over the Monolithic and Simple design, 
there are also some disadvantages as follows.
1. Complex and careful implementation :
As a layer can access the services of the layers below it, so the arrangement 
of the layers must be done carefully. For example, the backing storage layer
uses the services of the memory management layer. So it must be kept 
below the memory management layer. Thus with great modularity comes 
complex implementation.
2. Slower in execution :
If a layer wants to interact with another layer, it sends a request that has to 
travel through all the layers present in between the two interacting layers. 
Thus it increases response time, unlike the Monolithic system which is 
faster than this. Thus an increase in the number of layers may lead to a very 
inefficient design.
Monolithic Kernel

●Earlier in this type of kernel architecture, all the basic system services like process and
memory management, interrupt handling etc were packaged into a single module in kernel
space. 
●This type of architecture led to some serious drawbacks like 1) Size of kernel, which was
huge. 2)Poor maintainability, which means bug fixing or addition of new features resulted
in recompilation of the whole kernel which could consume hours 
●In a modern day approach to monolithic architecture, the kernel consists of different
modules which can be dynamically loaded and un-loaded. 
●This modular approach allows easy extension of OS's capabilities. With this approach,
maintainability of kernel became very easy as only the concerned module needs to be loaded
and unloaded every time there is a change or bug fix in a particular module. 
●So, there is no need to bring down and recompile the whole kernel for a smallest bit of
change. 
The entire operating system works in the kernel space in the monolithic system. This increases
the size of the kernel as well as the operating system. This is different than the microkernel
system where the minimum software that is required to correctly implement an operating
system is kept in the kernel.
A diagram that demonstrates the architecture of a monolithic system is as follows −
The kernel provides various services such as memory management, file management, process
scheduling etc. using function calls. This makes the execution of the operating system quite
fast as the services are implemented under the same address space.
Advantages of Monolithic Kernel

Some of the advantages of monolithic kernel are −
●The execution of the monolithic kernel is quite fast as the services such as memory 
management, file management, process scheduling etc.are implemented under the 
same address space.
●A process runs completely in a single address space in the monolithic kernel.
●The monolithic kernel is a static single binary file.
Disadvantages of Monolithic Kernel
Some of the disadvantages of monolithic kernel are −
●If any service fails in the monolithic kernel, it leads to the failure of the entire system.
●To add any new service, the entire operating system needs to be modified by the user.
Microkernels
●
This architecture majorly caters to the problem of ever growing size of kernel code
which we could not control in the monolithic approach. 
●
This architecture allows some basic services like device driver management, protocol
stack, file system etc to run in user space. 
●
This reduces the kernel code size and also increases the security and stability of OS as
we have the bare minimum code running in kernel. 
●
So, if suppose a basic service like network service crashes due to buffer overflow, then
only the networking service's memory would be corrupted, leaving the rest of the
system still functional. 
●
In this architecture, all the basic OS services which are made part of user space are
made to run as servers which are used by other programs in the system through inter
process communication (IPC). eg: we have servers for device drivers, network
protocol stacks, file systems, graphics, etc. 
●
Microkernel servers are essentially daemon programs like any others, except that the
kernel grants some of them privileges to interact with parts of physical memory that
are otherwise off limits to most programs. This allows some servers, particularly
device drivers, to interact directly with hardware. These servers are started at the
system start-up.
What is Microkernel?
Microkernel is one of the classification of the kernel. Being a kernel it manages all 
system resources. But in a microkernel, the user services and kernel services are 
implemented in different address space. The user services are kept in user address 
space, and kernel services are kept under kernel address space, thus also reduces the 
size of kernel and size of operating system as well.

●It provides minimal services of process and memory management. 
●The communication between client program/application and services running 
in user address space is established through message passing, reducing the 
speed of execution microkernel. 
●The Operating System remains unaffected as user services and kernel services
are isolated so if any user service fails it does not affect kernel service. Thus it 
adds to one of the advantages in a microkernel. 
●It is easily extendable i.e. if any new services are to be added they are added to
user address space and hence requires no modification in kernel space. 
●It is also portable, secure and reliable.
Microkernel Architecture –
Since kernel is the core part of the operating system, so it is meant for handling the 
most important services only. Thus in this architecture only the most important 
services are inside kernel and rest of the OS services are present inside system 
application program. Thus users are able to interact with those not-so important 
services within the system application. And the microkernel is solely responsible for 
the most important services of operating system they are named as follows:
●Inter process-Communication
●Memory Management
●CPU-Scheduling
Advantages of Microkernel –
●The architecture of this kernel is small and isolated hence it can function 
better.

●Expansion of the system is easier, it is simply added in the system 
application without disturbing the kernel.
Disadvantage of Microkernel
Here, are drawback/cons of using Microkernel:
●Providing services in a microkernel system are expensive compared to the 
normal monolithic system.
●Context switch or a function call needed when the drivers are implemented 
as procedures or processes, respectively.
●The performance of a microkernel system can be indifferent and may lead to
some problems.
Differences Between Microkernel and Monolithic Kernel
Some of the differences between microkernel and monolithic kernel are given as follows −
●The microkernel is much smaller in size as compared to the monolithic kernel.
●The microkernel is easily extensible whereas this is quite complicated for the 
monolithic kernel.
●The execution of the microkernel is slower as compared to the monolithic kernel.
●Much more code is required to write a microkernel than the monolithic kernel.
●Examples of Microkernel are QNX, Symbian, L4 Linux etc. Monolithic Kernel 
examples areLinux, BSD etc.
Difference Between Microkernel and Monolithic 
Kernel
Parameters
Monolithic kernel
MicroKernel
Basic
It is a large process running in a 
single address space
It can be broken down into 
separate processes called servers.
Code
In order to write a monolithic kernel, 
less code is required.
In order to write a microkernel, 
more code is required

Security
If a service crashes, the whole system 
collapses in a monolithic kernel.
If a service crashes, it never 
affects the working of a 
microkernel.
Communication
It is a single static binary file
Servers communicate through 
IPC.
Example
Linux, BSDs, Microsoft Windows 
(95,98, Me), Solaris, OS-9, AIX, 
DOS, XTS-400, etc.
L4Linux, QNX, SymbianK42, 
Mac OS X, Integrity, etc.
Linux Kernel
Linux kernel is a free, open-source, monolithic, modular, Unix-like operating
system kernel. It is the main component of the Linux operating system (OS) and is
the core interface between the computer’s hardware and its processes.
The Linux kernel is used by Linux distributions alongside GNU tools and libraries.
This combination is sometimes referred to as GNU/Linux. Popular Linux 
distributions include Ubuntu, Fedora, and Arch Linux.
The Linux kernel was created by Linus Torvalds and is currently an open-source 
project with thousands of developers actively working on it.

Figure: The Linux Kernel
The Core Subsystems of the Linux Kernel are as follows:
1. The Process Scheduler
2. The Memory Management Unit (MMU)
3. The Virtual File System (VFS)
4. The Networking Unit
5. Inter-Process Communication Unit
The basic functioning of each of the 1st three subsystems is elaborated below:
●The Process Scheduler:
This kernel subsystem is responsible for fairly distributing the CPU time 
among all the processes running on the system simultaneously.
●The Memory Management Unit:
This kernel sub-unit is responsible for proper distribution of the memory 
resources among the various processes running on the system. The MMU 
does more than just simply provide separate virtual address spaces for each 
of the processes.
●The Virtual File System:
This subsystem is responsible for providing a unified interface to access 
stored data across different filesystems and physical storage media.
Shell

A shell is special user program which provide an interface to user to use 
operating system services. Shell accept human readable commands from user 
and convert them into something which kernel can understand. It is a command
language interpreter that execute commands read from input devices such as 
keyboards or from files. The shell gets started when the user logs in or start the 
terminal.
linux shell
•
Definition: A shell is a program that acts as the interface between user and 
UNIX system, allowing user to enter commands for the operating system to 
execute.
•
It is a command interpreter and programming language.
•
It may be used interactively mode or non-interactively mode.
•
It allows execution of synchronous commands and asynchronous commands.
•
Shell is broadly classified into two categories –
●Command Line Shell
●Graphical shell
Command Line Shell
Shell can be accessed by user using a command line interface. A special 
program called Terminal in linux/macOS or Command Prompt in Windows 
OS is provided to type in the human readable commands such as “cat”, “ls” etc.
and then it is being execute. The result is then displayed on the terminal to the 
user. A terminal in Ubuntu 16.4 system looks like this –

linux command line
In above screenshot “ls” command with “-l” option is executed.
It will list all the files in current working directory in long listing format.
Working with command line shell is bit difficult for the beginners because it’s 
hard to memorize so many commands. It is very powerful, it allows user to 
store commands in a file and execute them together. This way any repetitive 
task can be easily automated. These files are usually called batch files in 
Windows and Shell Scripts in Linux/macOS systems.
Graphical Shells
Graphical shells provide means for manipulating programs based on graphical 
user interface (GUI), by allowing for operations such as opening, closing, 
moving and resizing windows, as well as switching focus between windows. 
Window OS or Ubuntu OS can be considered as good example which provide 
GUI to user for interacting with program. User do not need to type in command
for every actions.A typical GUI in Ubuntu system –

GUI shell
There are several shells are available for Linux systems like –
●BASH (Bourne Again SHell) – It is most widely used shell in Linux 
systems. It is used as default login shell in Linux systems and in 
macOS. It can also be installed on Windows OS.
●CSH (C SHell) – The C shell’s syntax and usage are very similar to 
the C programming language.
●KSH (Korn SHell) – The Korn Shell also was the base for the 
POSIX Shell standard specifications etc.
Each shell does the same job but understand different commands and provide 
different built in functions.
Shell Responsibilities
• Program execution
• Variable and filename substitution
• I/O Redirection
• Pipeline  hookup
• Environment control
• Interpreted programming language

System  Call
• Definition:
A system call is a mechanism that provides the interface 
between a process and the operating system. It is a 
programmatic method in which a computer program requests a
service from the kernel of the OS.
How System Call Works?

As you can see in the above-given diagram.
Step 1) The processes executed in the user mode till the time a system call 
interrupts it.
Step 2) After that, the system call is executed in the kernel-mode on a priority 
basis.
Step 3) Once system call execution is over, control returns to the user mode.,
Step 4) The execution of user processes resumed in Kernel mode.
Why do you need System Calls in OS?
Following are situations which need system calls in OS:
●Reading and writing from files demand system calls.
●If a file system wants to create or delete files, system calls are required.
●System calls are used for the creation and management of new processes.
●Network connections need system calls for sending and receiving packets.
●Access to hardware devices like scanner, printer, need a system call.
Types of System calls
Here are the five types of system calls used in OS:
●Process Control

●File Management
●Device Management
●Information Maintenance
●Communications
Types of System calls
Process Control
This system calls perform the task of process creation, process termination, etc.
Functions:
●End and Abort
●Load and Execute
●Create Process and Terminate Process
●Wait and Signed Event
●Allocate and free memory

File Management
File management system calls handle file manipulation jobs like creating a file, 
reading, and writing, etc.
Functions:
●Create a file
●Delete file
●Open and close file
●Read, write, and reposition
●Get and set file attributes
Device Management
Device management does the job of device manipulation like reading from device 
buffers, writing into device buffers, etc.
Functions
●Request and release device
●Logically attach/ detach devices
●Get and Set device attributes
Information Maintenance
It handles information and its transfer between the OS and the user program.
Functions:
●Get or set time and date
●Get process and device attributes
Communication:
These types of system calls are specially used for interprocess communications.
Functions:
●Create, delete communications connections
●Send, receive message
●Help OS to transfer status information
●Attach or detach remote devices
Important System Calls Used in OS

• wait()
• fork()
• exec()
• kill():
• exit():
wait()
In some systems, a process needs to wait for another process to complete its 
execution. This type of situation occurs when a parent process creates a child 
process, and the execution of the parent process remains suspended until its child 
process executes.
The suspension of the parent process automatically occurs with a wait() system 
call. When the child process ends execution, the control moves back to the parent 
process.
fork()
Processes use this system call to create processes that are a copy of themselves. 
With the help of this system Call parent process creates a child process, and the 
execution of the parent process will be suspended till the child process executes.
exec()
This system call runs when an executable file in the context of an already running 
process that replaces the older executable file. However, the original process 
identifier remains as a new process is not built, but stack, data, head, data, etc. are 
replaced by the new process.
kill():
The kill() system call is used by OS to send a termination signal to a process that 
urges the process to exit. However, a kill system call does not necessarily mean 
killing the process and can have various meanings.
exit():
The exit() system call is used to terminate program execution. Specially in the 
multi-threaded environment, this call defines that the thread execution is complete. 
The OS reclaims resources that were used by the process after the use of exit() 
system call.
