Module 3
Process Synchronization and Deadlocks
Concurrency in Operating System
Concurrency is the execution of the multiple instruction sequences at the same 
time. It happens in the operating system when there are several process 
threads running in parallel. The running process threads always communicate 
with each other through shared memory or message passing. Concurrency 
results in sharing of resources result in problems like deadlocks and resources 
starvation.
It helps in techniques like coordinating execution of processes, memory 
allocation and execution scheduling for maximizing throughput.
Principles of Concurrency: 
Both interleaved and overlapped processes can be viewed as examples of 
concurrent processes, they both present the same problems.
The relative speed of execution cannot be predicted. It depends on the 
following:

The activities of other processes

The way operating system handles interrupts

The scheduling policies of the operating system
Problems in Concurrency :

Sharing global resources –
Sharing of global resources safely is difficult. If two processes both 
make use of a global variable and both perform read and write on that 
variable, then the order iin which various read and write are executed 
is critical.

Optimal allocation of resources –
It is difficult for the operating system to manage the allocation of 
resources optimally.

Locating programming errors –
It is very difficult to locate a programming error because reports are 
usually not reproducible.

Locking the channel –
It may be inefficient for the operating system to simply lock the 
channel and prevents its use by other processes.
Advantages of Concurrency :

Running of multiple applications –
It enable to run multiple applications at the same time.

Better resource utilization –

It enables that the resources that are unused by one application can 
be used for other applications.

Better average response time –
Without concurrency, each application has to be run to completion 
before the next one can be run.

Better performance –
It enables the better performance by the operating system. When one 
application uses only the processor and another application uses only 
the disk drive then the time to run both applications concurrently to 
completion will be shorter than the time to run each application 
consecutively.
Drawbacks of Concurrency :

It is required to protect multiple applications from one another.

It is required to coordinate multiple applications through additional 
mechanisms.

Additional performance overheads and complexities in operating 
systems are required for switching among applications.

Sometimes running too many applications concurrently leads to 
severely degraded performance.
Issues of Concurrency :

Non-atomic –
Operations that are non-atomic but interruptible by multiple processes 
can cause problems.

Race conditions –
A race condition occurs of the outcome depends on which of several 
processes gets to a point first.

Blocking –
Processes can block waiting for resources. A process could be 
blocked for long period of time waiting for input from a terminal. If the 
process is required to periodically update some data, this would be 
very undesirable.

Starvation –
It occurs when a process does not obtain service to progress.

Deadlock –
It occurs when two processes are blocked and hence neither can 
proceed to execute.
Inter Process Communication in OS

Inter Process Communication (IPC) refers to a mechanism, where the operating systems allow 
various processes to communicate with each other. This involves synchronizing their actions 
and managing shared data. 
A diagram that illustrates interprocess communication is as follows −
There are 2 types of process –
o
Independent Processes – Processes which do not share data with other 
processes .
o
Cooperating Processes – Processes that shares data with other 
processes.
Cooperating process require Inter process communication (IPC) mechanism.
Inter Process Communication is the mechanism by which cooperating process share 
data and information.
There are 2 ways by which Inter process communication is achieved –
o
Shared memory    
o
Message Passing
Shared Memory
1. A particular region of memory is shared between cooperating process.
2.
Cooperating process can exchange information by reading and writing data to this 
shared region.
3.
It’s faster than Memory Parsing, as Kernel is required only once, that is, setting up a 
shared memory. After That, kernel assistance is not required.
Message Passing
1. Communication takes place by exchanging messages directly between cooperating 
process.

2.
Easy to implement   
3.
Useful for small amount of data.
4.
Implemented using System Calls, so takes more time than Shared Memory.
Process Synchronization
Process Synchronization means sharing system resources by processes in a such a 
way that, Concurrent access to shared data is handled thereby minimizing the chance 
of inconsistent data. Maintaining data consistency demands mechanisms to ensure 
synchronized execution of cooperating processes.
Process Synchronization was introduced to handle problems that arose while multiple 
process executions. Some of the problems are discussed below.
1. Critical Section Problem
  2. Race Condition
1. Critical Section Problem
A Critical Section is a code segment that accesses shared variables and has to be 
executed as an atomic action. It means that in a group of cooperating processes, at a 
given point of time, only one process must be executing its critical section. If any other 
process also wants to execute its critical section, it must wait until the first one finishes.

This setup can be defined in various regions like:

Entry Section –
It is part of the process which decide the entry of a particular process in the Critical 
Section, out of many other processes.

Critical Section –
It is the part in which only one process is allowed to enter and modify the shared 
variable. This part of the process ensures that only no other process can access the 
resource of shared data.

Exit Section –
This process allows the other process that is waiting in the Entry Section, to enter into 
the Critical Sections. It checks that a process that after a process has finished execution 
in Critical Section can be removed through this Exit Section.

Remainder Section –
The other parts of the Code other than Entry Section, Critical Section and Exit Section 
are known as Remainder Section.
Solution to Critical Section Problem
A solution to the critical section problem must satisfy the following three conditions:
1. Mutual Exclusion
Out of a group of cooperating processes, only one process can be in its critical section 
at a given point of time.

2. Progress
If no process is in its critical section, and if one or more threads want to execute their 
critical section then any one of these threads must be allowed to get into its critical 
section.
3. Bounded Waiting
After a process makes a request for getting into its critical section, there is a limit for 
how many other processes can get into their critical section, before this process's 
request is granted. So after the limit is reached, system must grant the process 
permission to get into its critical section.
2. Race Condition
When more than one processes are executing the same code or accessing the 
same memory or any shared variable in that condition there is a possibility that 
the output or the value of the shared variable is wrong so for that all the 
processes doing the race to say that my output is correct this condition known 
as a race condition. Several processes access and process the manipulations 
over the same data concurrently, then the outcome depends on the particular 
order in which the access takes place.
A race condition is a situation that may occur inside a critical section. This 
happens when the result of multiple thread execution in the critical section 
differs according to the order in which the threads execute.
Race conditions in critical sections can be avoided if the critical section is 
treated as an atomic instruction. That means that once a single thread is 
executing it, no other threads can execute it until the first thread has left the 
critical section. Also, proper thread synchronization using locks or atomic 
variables can prevent race conditions.
Two Types of Race Conditions
Race conditions can occur when two or more threads read and write the same 
variable according to one of these two patterns:

Read-modify-write

Check-then-act
The read-modify-write pattern means, that two or more threads first read a 
given variable, then modify its value and write it back to the variable. For this 
to cause a problem, the new value must depend one way or another on the 
previous value. The problem that can occur is, if two threads read the value 

(into CPU registers) then modify the value (in the CPU registers) and then 
write the values back. 
The check-then-act pattern means, that two or more threads check a given 
condition, for instance if a Map contains a given value, and then go on to act 
based on that information, e.g. taking the value from the Map. The problem 
may occur if two threads check the Map for a given value at the same time - 
see that the value is present - and then both threads try to take (remove) that 
value. However, only one of the threads can actually take the value. The other 
thread will get a null value back. This could also happen if a Queue was used 
instead of a Map.
Preventing Race Conditions
To prevent race conditions from occurring you must make sure that the critical 
section is executed as an atomic instruction. That means that once a single 
thread is executing it, no other threads can execute it until the first thread has 
left the critical section.
Race conditions can be avoided by proper thread synchronization in critical 
sections. Thread synchronization can be achieved using a synchronized 
block of Java code. Thread synchronization can also be achieved using 
other synchronization constructs like locks or atomic variables 
Mutual Exclusion in Synchronization
During concurrent execution of processes, processes need to enter the critical 
section (or the section of the program shared across processes) at times for 
execution. It might so happen that because of the execution of multiple 
processes at once, the values stored in the critical section become inconsistent. 
In other words, the values depend on the sequence of execution of instructions 
– also known as a race condition. The primary task of process synchronization 
is to get rid of race conditions while executing the critical section.
This is primarily achieved through mutual exclusion.
Mutual exclusion is a property of process synchronization which states that 
“no two processes can exist in the critical section at any given point of time”. 
The term was first coined by Djikstra. Any process synchronization technique 
being used must satisfy the property of mutual exclusion, without which it would 
not be possible to get rid of a race condition.
To understand mutual exclusion, let’s take an example.
Example:

In the clothes section of a supermarket, two people are shopping for clothes.
Boy A decides upon some clothes to buy and heads to the changing room to try 
them out. Now, while boy A is inside the changing room, there is an ‘occupied’ 
sign on it – indicating that no one else can come in. Girl B has to use the 
changing room too, so she has to wait till boy A is done using the changing 
room.
Once boy A comes out of the changing room, the sign on it changes from 
‘occupied’ to ‘vacant’ – indicating that another person can use it. Hence, girl B 
proceeds to use the changing room, while the sign displays ‘occupied’ again.

The changing room is nothing but the critical section, boy A and girl B are two 
different processes, while the sign outside the changing room indicates the 
process synchronization mechanism being used.
Synchronization Hardware
Many systems provide hardware support for critical section code. The critical section 
problem could be solved easily in a single-processor environment if we could disallow 
interrupts to occur while a shared variable or resource is being modified.
In this manner, we could be sure that the current sequence of instructions would be 
allowed to execute in order without pre-emption. Unfortunately, this solution is not 
feasible in a multiprocessor environment.
Disabling interrupt on a multiprocessor environment can be time consuming as the 
message is passed to all the processors.
This message transmission lag, delays entry of threads into critical section and the 
system efficiency decreases.
Mutex Locks
As the synchronization hardware solution is not easy to implement for everyone, a strict 
software approach called Mutex Locks was introduced. In this approach, in the entry 
section of code, a LOCK is acquired over the critical resources modified and used inside 
critical section, and in the exit section that LOCK is released.
As the resource is locked while a process executes its critical section hence no other 
process can access it.

Semaphores
Semaphore was proposed by Dijkstra in 1965 which is a very significant 
technique to manage concurrent processes by using a simple integer value, 
which is known as a semaphore. Semaphore is simply a variable which is non-
negative and shared between threads. This variable is used to solve the critical 
section problem and to achieve process synchronization in the multiprocessing 
environment. 
Semaphores are integer variables that are used to solve the critical section problem by 
using two atomic operations, wait and signal that are used for process synchronization.
The definitions of wait and signal are as follows −

Wait
The wait operation decrements the value of its argument S, if it is positive. If S is 
negative or zero, then no operation is performed.
wait(S)
{
   while (S<=0);
   S--;
}

Signal
The signal operation increments the value of its argument S.
signal(S)
{
   S++;
}
Types of Semaphores
There are two main types of semaphores i.e. counting semaphores and binary 
semaphores. Details about these are given as follows −


Counting Semaphores
These are integer value semaphores and have an unrestricted value domain. 
These semaphores are used to coordinate the resource access, where the 
semaphore count is the number of available resources. If the resources are 
added, semaphore count automatically incremented and if the resources are 
removed, the count is decremented.

Binary Semaphores
The binary semaphores are like counting semaphores but their value is restricted 
to 0 and 1. The wait operation only works when the semaphore is 1 and the 
signal operation succeeds when semaphore is 0. It is sometimes easier to 
implement binary semaphores than counting semaphores.
Advantages of Semaphores
Some of the advantages of semaphores are as follows −

Semaphores allow only one process into the critical section. They follow the 
mutual exclusion principle strictly and are much more efficient than some other 
methods of synchronization.

There is no resource wastage because of busy waiting in semaphores as 
processor time is not wasted unnecessarily to check if a condition is fulfilled to 
allow a process to access the critical section.

Semaphores are implemented in the machine independent code of the 
microkernel. So they are machine independent.
Disadvantages of Semaphores
Some of the disadvantages of semaphores are as follows −

Semaphores are complicated so the wait and signal operations must be 
implemented in the correct order to prevent deadlocks.

Semaphores are impractical for last scale use as their use leads to loss of 
modularity. This happens because the wait and signal operations prevent the 
creation of a structured layout for the system.

Semaphores may lead to a priority inversion where low priority processes may 
access the critical section first and high priority processes later.
Producer and Consumer problem
The Producer-Consumer problem is a classical multi-process synchronization problem, 
that is we are trying to achieve synchronization between more than one process.
There is one Producer in the producer-consumer problem, Producer is producing some 
items, whereas there is one Consumer that is consuming the items produced by the 

Producer. The same memory buffer is shared by both producers and consumers which 
is of fixed-size.
The task of the Producer is to produce the item, put it into the memory buffer, and 
again start producing items. Whereas the task of the Consumer is to consume the item 
from the memory buffer.
Let's understand what is the problem?
Below are a few points that considered as the problems occur in Producer-Consumer:
o
The producer should produce data only when the buffer is not full. In case it is 
found that the buffer is full, the producer is not allowed to store any data into 
the memory buffer.
o
Data can only be consumed by the consumer if and only if the memory buffer is 
not empty. In case it is found that the buffer is empty, the consumer is not 
allowed to use any data from the memory buffer.
o
Accessing memory buffer should not be allowed to producer and consumer at the 
same time.
Let's see the code for the above problem:
Producer Code
Consumer Code

Let's understand above Producer and Consumer code:
Before Starting an explanation of code, first, understand the few terms used in the 
above code:
1. "in" used in a producer code represent the next empty buffer
2. "out" used in consumer code represent first filled buffer
3. count keeps the count number of elements in the buffer
4. count is further divided into 3 lines code represented in the block in both the 
producer and consumer code.
If we talk about Producer code first:
--Rp is a register which keeps the value of m[count]
--Rp is incremented (As element has been added to buffer)
--an Incremented value of Rp is stored back to m[count]
Similarly, if we talk about Consumer code next:
--Rc is a register which keeps the value of m[count]
--Rc is decremented (As element has been removed out of buffer)
--the decremented value of Rc is stored back to m[count].
BUFFER

As we can see from Fig: Buffer has total 8 spaces out of which the first 5 are filled, in = 
5(pointing next empty position) and out = 0(pointing first filled position).
Let's start with the producer who wanted to produce an element " F ", according to 
code it will enter into the producer() function, while(1) will always be true, itemP = F 
will be tried to insert into the buffer, before that while(count == n); will evaluate to be 
False.
Buffer[in] = itemP → Buffer[5] = F. ( F is inserted now)
in = (in + 1) mod n → (5 + 1)mod 8→ 6, therefore in = 6; (next empty buffer)
After insertion of F, Buffer looks like this
Where out = 0, but in = 6

Since count = count + 1; is divided into three parts:
Load Rp, m[count] → will copy count value which is 5 to register Rp.
Increment Rp → will increment Rp to 6.
Suppose just after Increment and before the execution of third line (store m[count], 
Rp) Context Switch occurs and code jumps to consumer code. . .
Consumer Code:
Now starting consumer who wanted to consume the first element " A ", according to 
code it will enter into the consumer() function, while(1) will always be true, while(count 
== 0); will evaluate to be False( since the count is still 5, which is not equal to 0.
itemC = Buffer[out]→ itemC = A ( since out is 0)
out = (out + 1) mod n → (0 + 1)mod 8→ 1, therefore out = 1( first filled position)
A is removed now
After removal of A, Buffer look like this
Where out = 1, and in = 6

Since count = count - 1; is divided into three parts:
Load Rc, m[count] → will copy count value which is 5 to register Rp.
Decrement Rc → will decrement Rc to 4.
store m[count], Rc → count = 4.
Now the current value of count is 4
Suppose after this Context Switch occurs back to the leftover part of producer code. . 
.
Since context switch at producer code was occurred after Increment and before the 
execution of the third line (store m[count], Rp)
So we resume from here since Rp holds 6 as incremented value
Hence store m[count], Rp → count = 6
Now the current value of count is 6, which is wrong as Buffer has only 5 
elements, this condition is known as Race Condition and Problem is Producer-
Consumer Problem.
The solution of Producer-Consumer Problem using 
Semaphore
The above problems of Producer and Consumer which occurred due to context switch 
and producing inconsistent result can be solved with the help of semaphores.
To solve the problem occurred above of race condition, we are going to use Binary 
Semaphore and Counting Semaphore

Binary Semaphore: In Binary Semaphore, only two processes can compete to enter 
into its CRITICAL SECTION at any point in time, apart from this the condition of 
mutual exclusion is also preserved.
Counting Semaphore: In counting semaphore, more than two processes can compete 
to enter into its CRITICAL SECTION at any point of time apart from this the condition 
of mutual exclusion is also preserved.
Semaphore: A semaphore is an integer variable in S, that apart from initialization is 
accessed by only two standard atomic operations - wait and signal, whose definitions 
are as follows:
1. 1. wait( S )  
2. {  
3. while( S <= 0) ;  
4. S--;  
5. }  
1. 2. signal( S )  
2. {  
3. S++;  
4. }  
From the above definitions of wait, it is clear that if the value of S <= 0 then it will 
enter into an infinite loop (because of the semicolon; after while loop). Whereas the job 
of the signal is to increment the value of S.
Let's see the code as a solution of producer and consumer problem using semaphore ( 
Both Binary and Counting Semaphore):
Producer Code- solution
1. void producer( void )  
2. {  
3.   wait ( empty );  
4.   wait(S);  
5.   Produce_item(item P)  
6.   buffer[ in ] = item P;  
7.   in = (in + 1)mod n  
8.   signal(S);  
9.   signal(full);  

10.    
11.}  
Consumer Code- solution
1. void consumer(void)  
2. {  
3.   wait ( empty );  
4.   wait(S);  
5.   itemC = buffer[ out ];  
6.   out = ( out + 1 ) mod n;  
7.   signal(S);  
8.   signal(empty);  
9. }  
Let's understand the above Solution of Producer and 
Consumer code:
Before Starting an explanation of code, first, understand the few terms used in the 
above code:
1. "in" used in a producer code represent the next empty buffer
2. "out" used in consumer code represent first filled buffer
3. "empty" is counting semaphore which keeps a score of no. of empty buffer
4. "full" is counting semaphore which scores of no. of full buffer
5. "S" is a binary semaphore BUFFER
If we see the current situation of Buffer
S = 1(init. Value of Binary semaphore
in = 5( next empty buffer)
out = 0(first filled buffer)

As we can see from Fig: Buffer has total 8 spaces out of which the first 5 are filled, in = 
5(pointing next empty position) and out = 0(pointing first filled position).
Semaphores used in Producer Code:
6. wait(empty) will decrease the value of the counting semaphore variable empty by 
1, that is when the producer produces some element then the value of the space gets 
automatically decreased by one in the buffer. In case the buffer is full, that is the value 
of the counting semaphore variable "empty" is 0, then wait(empty); will trap the 
process (as per definition of wait) and does not allow to go further.
7. wait(S) decreases the binary semaphore variable S to 0 so that no other process 
which is willing to enter into its critical section is allowed.
8. signal(s) increases the binary semaphore variable S to 1 so that other processes 
who are willing to enter into its critical section can now be allowed.
9. signal(full) increases the counting semaphore variable full by 1, as on adding the 
item into the buffer, one space is occupied in the buffer and the variable full must be 
updated.
Semaphores used in consumer Code:
10.wait(full) will decrease the value of the counting semaphore variable full by 1, that 
is when the consumer consumes some element then the value of the full space gets 
automatically decreased by one in the buffer. In case the buffer is empty, that is the 
value of the counting semaphore variable full is 0, then wait(full); will trap the 
process(as per definition of wait) and does not allow to go further.
11. wait(S) decreases the binary semaphore variable S to 0 so that no other process 
which is willing to enter into its critical section is allowed.
12. signal(S) increases the binary semaphore variable S to 1 so that other processes 
who are willing to enter into its critical section can now be allowed.

13. signal(empty) increases the counting semaphore variable empty by 1, as on 
removing an item from the buffer, one space is vacant in the buffer and the variable 
empty must be updated accordingly.
Producer Code:
Let's start with producer() who wanted to produce an element " F ", according to code it 
will enter into the producer() function.
wait(empty); will decrease the value of empty by one, i.e. empty = 2
Suppose just after this context switch occurs and jumps to consumer code.
Consumer Code:
Now starting consumer who wanted to consume first element " A ", according to code it 
will enter into consumer() function,
wait(full); will decrease the value of full by one, i.e. full = 4
wait (S); will decrease the value of S to 0
itemC = Buffer[out]; → itemC = A ( since out is 0)
A is removed now
out = (out + 1) mod n → (0 + 1)mod 8 → 1, therefore out = 1( first filled position)
S = 0(Value of Binary semaphore)
in = 5( next empty buffer)
out = 1(first filled buffer)
Suppose just after this context, switch occurs back to producer code

Since the next instruction of producer() is wait(S);, this will trap the producer process, 
as the current value of S is 0, and wait(0); is an infinite loop: as per the definition of 
wait, hence producer cannot move further.
Therefore, we move back to the consumer process next instruction.
signal(S); will now increment the value of S to 1.
signal(empty); will increment empty by 1, i.e. empty = 3
Now moving back to producer() code;
Since the next instruction of producer() is wait(S); will successfully execute, as S is 
now 1 and it will decrease the value of S by 1, i.e. S = 0
Buffer[in] = itemP; → Buffer[5] = F. ( F is inserted now)
in = (in + 1) mod n → (5 + 1)mod 8 → 6, therefore in = 6; (next empty buffer)
signal(S); will increment S by 1,
signal(full); will increment full by 1, i.e. full = 5
Now add current value of full and empty, i.e. full + empty = 5 + 3 = 8(which is 
absolutely fine) No inconsistent result is generated even after so many context 

switches. But in the previous condition of producer and consumer without semaphore, 
we see the inconsistent result in case of context switches.
This is the solution to the Producer consumer problem.
THE DINING PHILOSOPHERS PROBLEM
The dining philosopher's problem is the classical problem of synchronization which says 
that Five philosophers are sitting around a circular table and their job is to think and eat 
alternatively. A bowl of noodles is placed at the center of the table along with five 
chopsticks for each of the philosophers. To eat a philosopher needs both their right and 
a left chopstick. A philosopher can only eat if both immediate left and right chopsticks 
of the philosopher is available. In case if both immediate left and right chopsticks of the 
philosopher are not available then the philosopher puts down their (either left or right) 
chopstick and starts thinking again.
The dining philosopher demonstrates a large class of concurrency control problems 
hence it's a classic synchronization problem.
Five Philosophers sitting around the table
Dining Philosophers Problem- Let's understand the Dining Philosophers Problem with 
the below code, we have used fig 1 as a reference to make you understand the problem 
exactly. The five Philosophers are represented as P0, P1, P2, P3, and P4 and five 
chopsticks by C0, C1, C2, C3, and C4.

1. Void Philosopher  
2.  {  
3.  while(1)  
4.   {  
5.    take_chopstick[i];  
6.    take_chopstick[ (i+1) % 5] ;  
7.    . .  
8.    . EATING THE NOODLE  
9.    .  
10.   put_chopstick[i] );  
11.   put_chopstick[ (i+1) % 5] ;  
12.   .  
13.   . THINKING  
14.  }  
15.}  
Let's discuss the above code:
Suppose Philosopher P0 wants to eat, it will enter in Philosopher() function, and 
execute take_chopstick[i]; by doing this it holds C0 chopstick after that it 
execute take_chopstick[ (i+1) % 5]; by doing this it holds C1 chopstick( since i 
=0, therefore (0 + 1) % 5 = 1)
Similarly suppose now Philosopher P1 wants to eat, it will enter in Philosopher() 
function, and execute take_chopstick[i]; by doing this it holds C1 chopstick after 

that it execute take_chopstick[ (i+1) % 5]; by doing this it holds C2 chopstick( 
since i =1, therefore (1 + 1) % 5 = 2)
But Practically Chopstick C1 is not available as it has already been taken by philosopher 
P0, hence the above code generates problems and produces race condition.
The solution of the Dining Philosophers Problem
We use a semaphore to represent a chopstick and this truly acts as a solution of the 
Dining Philosophers Problem. Wait and Signal operations will be used for the solution of 
the Dining Philosophers Problem, for picking a chopstick wait operation can be executed 
while for releasing a chopstick signal semaphore can be executed.
Semaphore: A semaphore is an integer variable in S, that apart from initialization is 
accessed by only two standard atomic operations - wait and signal, whose definitions 
are as follows:
1. 1. wait( S )  
2. {  
3. while( S <= 0) ;  
4. S--;  
5. }  
6.   
7. 2. signal( S )  
8. {  
9. S++;  
10.}  
From the above definitions of wait, it is clear that if the value of S <= 0 then it will 
enter into an infinite loop(because of the semicolon; after while loop). Whereas the job 
of the signal is to increment the value of S.
The structure of the chopstick is an array of a semaphore which is represented as 
shown below -
1. semaphore C[5];  
Initially, each element of the semaphore C0, C1, C2, C3, and C4 are initialized to 1 as 
the chopsticks are on the table and not picked up by any of the philosophers.
Let's modify the above code of the Dining Philosopher Problem by using semaphore 
operations wait and signal, the desired code looks like

1. void Philosopher  
2.  {  
3.  while(1)  
4.   {  
5.    Wait( take_chopstickC[i] );  
6.    Wait( take_chopstickC[(i+1) % 5] ) ;  
7.    . .  
8.    . EATING THE NOODLE  
9.    .  
10.   Signal( put_chopstickC[i] );  
11.   Signal( put_chopstickC[ (i+1) % 5] ) ;  
12.   .  
13.   . THINKING  
14.  }  
15.}  
In the above code, first wait operation is performed on take_chopstickC[i] and 
take_chopstickC [ (i+1) % 5]. This shows philosopher i have picked up the chopsticks 
from its left and right. The eating function is performed after that.
On completion of eating by philosopher i the, signal operation is performed on 
take_chopstickC[i] and take_chopstickC [ (i+1) % 5]. This shows that the philosopher i 
have eaten and put down both the left and right chopsticks. Finally, the philosopher 
starts thinking again.
