Page Replacement Algorithms in Operating 
Systems
In an operating system that uses paging for memory management, a page 
replacement algorithm is needed to decide which page needs to be replaced 
when new page comes in.
Page Fault – A page fault happens when a running program accesses a memory 
page that is mapped into the virtual address space, but not loaded in physical 
memory.
Since actual physical memory is much smaller than virtual memory, page faults 
happen. In case of page fault, Operating System might have to replace one of 
the existing pages with the newly needed page. Different page replacement 
algorithms suggest different ways to decide which page to replace. The target for 
all algorithms is to reduce the number of page faults.
Page Replacement Algorithms :

First In First Out (FIFO) –
This is the simplest page replacement algorithm. In this algorithm, the 
operating system keeps track of all pages in the memory in a queue, 
the oldest page is in the front of the queue. When a page needs to be 
replaced page in the front of the queue is selected for removal.
Example-1Consider page reference string 1, 3, 0, 3, 5, 6 with 3 page 
frames.Find number of page faults.

Initially all slots are empty, so when 1, 3, 0 came they are allocated to 
the empty slots —> 3 Page Faults.
when 3 comes, it is already in  memory so —> 0 Page Faults.
Then 5 comes, it is not available in  memory so it replaces the oldest 
page slot i.e 1. —>1 Page Fault.
6 comes, it is also not available in memory so it replaces the oldest 
page slot i.e 3 —>1 Page Fault.
Finally when 3 come it is not avilable so it replaces 0 1 page fault
Belady’s anomaly – Belady’s anomaly proves that it is possible to have 
more page faults when increasing the number of page frames while 
using the First in First Out (FIFO) page replacement algorithm.  For 
example, if we consider reference string 3, 2, 1, 0, 3, 2, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, 4 
and 3 slots, we get 9 total page faults, but if we increase slots to 4, we 
get 10 page faults.

Optimal Page replacement –
In this algorithm, pages are replaced which would not be used for the 
longest duration of time in the future.
Example-2:Consider the page references 7, 0, 1, 2, 0, 3, 0, 4, 2, 3, 0, 
3, 2, with 4 page frame. Find number of page fault.

Initially all slots are empty, so when 7 0 1 2 are allocated to the empty 
slots —> 4 Page faults
0 is already there so —> 0 Page fault.
when 3 came it will take the place of 7 because it is not used for the 
longest duration of time in the future.—>1 Page fault.
0 is already there so —> 0 Page fault..
4 will takes place of 1 —> 1 Page Fault.
Now for the further page reference string —> 0 Page fault because 
they are already available in the memory.
Optimal page replacement is perfect, but not possible in practice as the 
operating system cannot know future requests. The use of Optimal 
Page replacement is to set up a benchmark so that other replacement 
algorithms can be analyzed against it.
 

Least Recently Used –
In this algorithm page will be replaced which is least recently used.
Example-3Consider the page reference string 7, 0, 1, 2, 0, 3, 0, 4, 2, 3, 
0, 3, 2 with 4 page frames.Find number of page faults.

Initially all slots are empty, so when 7 0 1 2 are allocated to the empty 
slots —> 4 Page faults
0 is already their so —> 0 Page fault.
when 3 came it will take the place of 7 because it is least recently used 
—>1 Page fault
0 is already in memory so —> 0 Page fault.
4 will takes place of 1 —> 1 Page Fault
Now for the further page reference string —> 0 Page fault because 
they are already available in the memory.
A computer can address more memory than the amount physically installed on the 
system. This extra memory is actually called virtual memory and it is a section of a 
hard disk that's set up to emulate the computer's RAM.
The main visible advantage of this scheme is that programs can be larger than physical 
memory. Virtual memory serves two purposes. First, it allows us to extend the use of 
physical memory by using disk. Second, it allows us to have memory protection, 
because each virtual address is translated to a physical address.
Following are the situations, when entire program is not required to be loaded fully in 
main memory.

User written error handling routines are used only when an error occurred in the 
data or computation.


Certain options and features of a program may be used rarely.

Many tables are assigned a fixed amount of address space even though only a 
small amount of the table is actually used.

The ability to execute a program that is only partially in memory would counter 
many benefits.

Less number of I/O would be needed to load or swap each user program into 
memory.

A program would no longer be constrained by the amount of physical memory 
that is available.

Each user program could take less physical memory, more programs could be 
run the same time, with a corresponding increase in CPU utilization and 
throughput.
Modern microprocessors intended for general-purpose use, a memory management 
unit, or MMU, is built into the hardware. The MMU's job is to translate virtual addresses 
into physical addresses. A basic example is given below −

Virtual memory is commonly implemented by demand paging. It can also be 
implemented in a segmentation system. Demand segmentation can also be used to 
provide virtual memory.
Demand Paging
A demand paging system is quite similar to a paging system with swapping where 
processes reside in secondary memory and pages are loaded only on demand, not in 
advance. When a context switch occurs, the operating system does not copy any of the 
old program’s pages out to the disk or any of the new program’s pages into the main 
memory Instead, it just begins executing the new program after loading the first page 
and fetches that program’s pages as they are referenced.
While executing a program, if the program references a page which is not available in 
the main memory because it was swapped out a little ago, the processor treats this 
invalid memory reference as a page fault and transfers control from the program to the 
operating system to demand the page back into the memory.

Advantages
Following are the advantages of Demand Paging −

Large virtual memory.

More efficient use of memory.

There is no limit on degree of multiprogramming.
Disadvantages

Number of tables and the amount of processor overhead for handling page 
interrupts are greater than in the case of the simple paged management 
techniques.
Page Replacement Algorithm
Page replacement algorithms are the techniques using which an Operating System 
decides which memory pages to swap out, write to disk when a page of memory needs 
to be allocated. Paging happens whenever a page fault occurs and a free page cannot 
be used for allocation purpose accounting to reason that pages are not available or the 
number of free pages is lower than required pages.
When the page that was selected for replacement and was paged out, is referenced 
again, it has to read in from disk, and this requires for I/O completion. This process 
determines the quality of the page replacement algorithm: the lesser the time waiting 
for page-ins, the better is the algorithm.
A page replacement algorithm looks at the limited information about accessing the 
pages provided by hardware, and tries to select which pages should be replaced to 
minimize the total number of page misses, while balancing it with the costs of primary 
storage and processor time of the algorithm itself. There are many different page 
replacement algorithms. We evaluate an algorithm by running it on a particular string of 
memory reference and computing the number of page faults,
Reference String
The string of memory references is called reference string. Reference strings are 
generated artificially or by tracing a given system and recording the address of each 
memory reference. The latter choice produces a large number of data, where we note 
two things.

For a given page size, we need to consider only the page number, not the entire 
address.

If we have a reference to a page p, then any immediately following references to 
page p will never cause a page fault. Page p will be in memory after the first 
reference; the immediately following references will not fault.


For 
example, 
consider 
the 
following 
sequence 
of 
addresses 
− 
123,215,600,1234,76,96

If page size is 100, then the reference string is 1,2,6,12,0,0
First In First Out (FIFO) algorithm

Oldest page in main memory is the one which will be selected for replacement.

Easy to implement, keep a list, replace pages from the tail and add new pages at 
the head.
Optimal Page algorithm

An optimal page-replacement algorithm has the lowest page-fault rate of all 
algorithms. An optimal page-replacement algorithm exists, and has been called 
OPT or MIN.

Replace the page that will not be used for the longest period of time. Use the 
time when a page is to be used.

Least Recently Used (LRU) algorithm

Page which has not been used for the longest time in main memory is the one 
which will be selected for replacement.

Easy to implement, keep a list, replace pages by looking back into time.
Page Buffering algorithm

To get a process start quickly, keep a pool of free frames.


On page fault, select a page to be replaced.

Write the new page in the frame of free pool, mark the page table and restart the 
process.

Now write the dirty page out of disk and place the frame holding replaced page in 
free pool.
Least frequently Used(LFU) algorithm

The page with the smallest count is the one which will be selected for 
replacement.

This algorithm suffers from the situation in which a page is used heavily during 
the initial phase of a process, but then is never used again.
Most frequently Used(MFU) algorithm

This algorithm is based on the argument that the page with the smallest count 
was probably just brought in and has yet to be used.
