Module 2
Process and Process Scheduling
Concept of Process:
A process is basically a program in execution. The execution of a process must 
progress in a sequential fashion.
A process is defined as an entity which represents the basic unit of work to be 
implemented in the system.
When a program is loaded into the memory and it becomes a process, it can be 
divided into four sections ─ stack, heap, text and data. The following image shows a 
simplified layout of a process inside main memory −
S.N.
Component & Description
1
Stack
The process Stack contains the temporary data such as method/function 
parameters, return address and local variables.
2
Heap
This is dynamically allocated memory to a process during its run time.

3
Text
This includes the current activity represented by the value of Program Counter and 
the contents of the processor's registers.
4
Data
This section contains the global and static variables.
Program
A program is a piece of code which may be a single line or millions of lines. A 
computer program is usually written by a computer programmer in a programming 
language. For example, here is a simple program written in C programming 
language −
#include <stdio.h>
int main() {
   printf("Hello, World! \n");
   return 0;
}
A computer program is a collection of instructions that performs a specific task 
when executed by a computer. When we compare a program with a process, we 
can conclude that a process is a dynamic instance of a computer program.
Process States/Process Life Cycle

When a process executes, it passes through different states. These stages may 
differ in different operating systems, and the names of these states are also not 
standardized.
In general, a process can have one of the following five states at a time.
S.N.
State & Description
1
Start
This is the initial state when a process is first started/created.
2
Ready
The process is waiting to be assigned to a processor. Ready processes are waiting 
to have the processor allocated to them by the operating system so that they can 
run. Process may come into this state after Start state or while running it by but 
interrupted by the scheduler to assign CPU to some other process.
3
Running
Once the process has been assigned to a processor by the OS scheduler, the 

process state is set to running and the processor executes its instructions.
4
Waiting
Process moves into the waiting state if it needs to wait for a resource, such as 
waiting for user input, or waiting for a file to become available.
5
Terminated or Exit
Once the process finishes its execution, or it is terminated by the operating system, 
it is moved to the terminated state where it waits to be removed from main 
memory.
6.
Suspend ready
A process in the ready state, which is moved to secondary memory from the main 
memory due to lack of the resources (mainly primary memory) is called in the 
suspend ready state.
If the main memory is full and a higher priority process comes for the execution 
then the OS have to make the room for the process in the main memory by 
throwing the lower priority process out into the secondary memory. The suspend 
ready processes remain in the secondary memory until the main memory gets 
available.
7.
Suspend wait
Instead of removing the process from the ready queue, it's better to remove the 
blocked process which is waiting for some resources in the main memory. Since it is 
already waiting for some resource to get available hence it is better if it waits in the 
secondary memory and make room for the higher priority process. These processes 
complete their execution once the main memory gets available and their wait is 
finished.
Process Description

There may exist more than one process in the system which may require the same 
resource at the same time. Therefore, the operating system has to manage all the 
processes and the resources in a convenient and efficient way.
Some resources may need to be executed by one process at one time to maintain 
the consistency otherwise the system can become inconsistent and deadlock may 
occur.
The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connection with 
Process Management
1. Scheduling processes and threads on the CPUs.
2. Creating and deleting both user and system processes.
3. Suspending and resuming processes.
4. Providing mechanisms for process synchronization.
5. Providing mechanisms for process communication.
Process Control Block (PCB)
A Process Control Block is a data structure maintained by the Operating System for 
every process. The PCB is identified by an integer process ID (PID). A PCB keeps 
all the information needed to keep track of a process as listed below in the table −
S.N.
Information & Description
1
Process State
The current state of the process i.e., whether it is ready, running, waiting, or 
whatever.
2
Process privileges
This is required to allow/disallow access to system resources.
3
Process ID
Unique identification for each of the process in the operating system.
4
Pointer
A pointer to parent process.

5
Program Counter
Program Counter is a pointer to the address of the next instruction to be executed 
for this process.
6
CPU registers
Various CPU registers where process need to be stored for execution for running 
state.
7
CPU Scheduling Information
Process priority and other scheduling information which is required to schedule the 
process.
8
Memory management information
This includes the information of page table, memory limits, Segment table 
depending on memory used by the operating system.
9
Accounting information
This includes the amount of CPU used for process execution, time limits, execution 
ID etc.
10
IO status information
This includes a list of I/O devices allocated to the process.
The architecture of a PCB is completely dependent on Operating System and may 
contain different information in different operating systems. Here is a simplified 
diagram of a PCB −

The PCB is maintained for a process throughout its lifetime, and is deleted once the 
process terminates.
Process Scheduling
Definition
The process scheduling is the activity of the process manager that handles the 
removal of the running process from the CPU and the selection of another process 
on the basis of a particular strategy.
Process scheduling is an essential part of Multiprogramming operating systems. 
Such operating systems allow more than one process to be loaded into the 
executable memory at a time and the loaded process shares the CPU using time 
multiplexing.
Process Scheduling Queues
The OS maintains all PCBs in Process Scheduling Queues. The OS maintains a 
separate queue for each of the process states and PCBs of all processes in the 
same execution state are placed in the same queue. When the state of a process is 
changed, its PCB is unlinked from its current queue and moved to its new state 
queue.

The Operating System maintains the following important process scheduling 
queues −

Job queue − This queue keeps all the processes in the system.

Ready queue − This queue keeps a set of all processes residing in main 
memory, ready and waiting to execute. A new process is always put in this 
queue.

Device queues − The processes which are blocked due to unavailability of 
an I/O device constitute this queue.
The OS can use different policies to manage each queue (FIFO, Round Robin, 
Priority, etc.). The OS scheduler determines how to move processes between the 
ready and run queues which can only have one entry per processor core on the 
system; in the above diagram, it has been merged with the CPU.
Two-State Process Model
Two-state process model refers to running and non-running states which are 
described below −
S.N.
State & Description
1
Running
When a new process is created, it enters into the system as in the running state.
2
Not Running
Processes that are not running are kept in queue, waiting for their turn to execute. 
Each entry in the queue is a pointer to a particular process. Queue is implemented 
by using linked list. Use of dispatcher is as follows. When a process is interrupted, 
that process is transferred in the waiting queue. If the process has completed or 
aborted, the process is discarded. In either case, the dispatcher then selects a 

process from the queue to execute.
CPU Scheduling
CPU Scheduling is a process of determining which process will own CPU 
for execution while another process is on hold. The main task of CPU 
scheduling is to make sure that whenever the CPU remains idle, the OS at 
least select one of the processes available in the ready queue for 
execution. The selection process will be carried out by the CPU scheduler. 
It selects one of the processes in memory that are ready for execution.
Schedulers
Schedulers are special system software which handle process scheduling in various 
ways. Their main task is to select the jobs to be submitted into the system and to 
decide which process to run. Schedulers are of three types −

Long-Term Scheduler

Short-Term Scheduler

Medium-Term Scheduler
Long Term Scheduler
It is also called a job scheduler. A long-term scheduler determines which programs 
are admitted to the system for processing. It selects processes from the queue and 
loads them into memory for execution. Process loads into the memory for CPU 
scheduling.
The primary objective of the job scheduler is to provide a balanced mix of jobs, such 
as I/O bound and processor bound. It also controls the degree of multiprogramming. 
If the degree of multiprogramming is stable, then the average rate of process 
creation must be equal to the average departure rate of processes leaving the 
system.
On some systems, the long-term scheduler may not be available or minimal. Time-
sharing operating systems have no long term scheduler. When a process changes 
the state from new to ready, then there is use of long-term scheduler.
Short Term Scheduler
It is also called as CPU scheduler. Its main objective is to increase system 
performance in accordance with the chosen set of criteria. It is the change of ready 
state to running state of the process. CPU scheduler selects a process among the 
processes that are ready to execute and allocates CPU to one of them.
Short-term schedulers, also known as dispatchers, make the decision of which 
process to execute next. Short-term schedulers are faster than long-term 
schedulers.

Medium Term Scheduler
Medium-term scheduling is a part of swapping. It removes the processes from the 
memory. It reduces the degree of multiprogramming. The medium-term scheduler is 
in-charge of handling the swapped out-processes.
A running process may become suspended if it makes an I/O request. A suspended 
processes cannot make any progress towards completion. In this condition, to 
remove the process from memory and make space for other processes, the 
suspended process is moved to the secondary storage. This process is 
called swapping, and the process is said to be swapped out or rolled out. 
Swapping may be necessary to improve the process mix.
Comparison among Scheduler
S.N.
Long-Term Scheduler
Short-Term Scheduler
Medium-Term Scheduler
1
It is a job scheduler
It is a CPU scheduler
It is a process swapping 
scheduler.
2
Speed is lesser than short 
term scheduler
Speed is fastest among 
other two
Speed is in between both 
short and long term 
scheduler.
3
It controls the degree of 
multiprogramming
It provides lesser control 
over degree of 
multiprogramming
It reduces the degree of 
multiprogramming.
4
It is almost absent or 
minimal in time sharing 
system
It is also minimal in time 
sharing system
It is a part of Time sharing 
systems.
5
It selects processes from 
pool and loads them into 
memory for execution
It selects those 
processes which are 
ready to execute
It can re-introduce the 
process into memory and 
execution can be 
continued.

•
Non-pre-emptive Scheduling : In non-preemptive mode, once if a process 
enters into running state, it continues to execute until it terminates or blocks 
itself to wait for Input/Output or by requesting some operating system service. 
In this type of scheduling method, the CPU has been allocated to a specific 
process. The process that keeps the CPU busy will release the CPU either by 
switching context or terminating. It is the only method that can be used for 
various hardware platforms. That's because it doesn't need special hardware 
(for example, a timer) like preemptive scheduling.
•
Preemptive Scheduling : In preemptive mode, currently running process 
may be interrupted and moved to the ready State by the operating system. 
When a new process arrives or when an interrupt occurs, preemptive policies 
may incur greater overhead than nonpreemptive version but preemptive 
version may provide better service.
In Preemptive Scheduling, the tasks are mostly assigned with their priorities. 
Sometimes it is important to run a task with a higher priority before another 
lower priority task, even if the lower priority task is still running. The lower 
priority task holds for some time and resumes when the higher priority task 
finishes its execution.
Context Switch
A context switch is the mechanism to store and restore the state or context of a 
CPU in Process Control block so that a process execution can be resumed from the 
same point at a later time. Using this technique, a context switcher enables multiple 
processes to share a single CPU. Context switching is an essential part of a 
multitasking operating system features.
When the scheduler switches the CPU from executing one process to execute 
another, the state from the current running process is stored into the process control 
block. After this, the state for the process to run next is loaded from its own PCB 
and used to set the PC, registers, etc. At that point, the second process can start 
executing.

Context switches are computationally intensive since register and memory state 
must be saved and restored. To avoid the amount of context switching time, some 
hardware systems employ two or more sets of processor registers. When the 
process is switched, the following information is stored for later use.

Program Counter

Scheduling information

Base and limit register value

Currently used register

Changed State

I/O State information

Accounting information
Scheduling Algorithms

There are various algorithms which are used by the Operating System to schedule 
the processes on the processor in an efficient way.
The Purpose of a Scheduling algorithm
1. Maximum CPU utilization
2. Fare allocation of CPU
3. Maximum throughput
4. Minimum turnaround time
5. Minimum waiting time
6. Minimum response time
Turnaround time: It is the total time taken between the submission of a 
program/process/thread/task (Linux) for execution and the return of the complete output to 
the customer/user.
Response time: It is the time spent between the ready state and getting the CPU for the 
first time.
Waiting time: It is the total time spent by the process in the ready state waiting for CPU.
There are the following algorithms which can be used to schedule the jobs.

1. First Come First Serve
It is the simplest algorithm to implement. The process with the minimal arrival time 
will get the CPU first. The lesser the arrival time, the sooner will the process gets the 
CPU. It is the non-preemptive type of scheduling.
2. Round Robin
In the Round Robin scheduling algorithm, the OS defines a time quantum (slice). All 
the processes will get executed in the cyclic way. Each of the process will get the 
CPU for a small amount of time (called time quantum) and then get back to the 
ready queue to wait for its next turn. It is a preemptive type of scheduling.
3. Shortest Job First
The job with the shortest burst time will get the CPU first. The lesser the burst time, 
the sooner will the process get the CPU. It is the non-preemptive type of scheduling.
4. Shortest remaining time first
It is the preemptive form of SJF. In this algorithm, the OS schedules the Job 
according to the remaining time of the execution.
5. Priority based scheduling
In this algorithm, the priority will be assigned to each of the processes. The higher 
the priority, the sooner will the process get the CPU. If the priority of the two 
processes is same then they will be scheduled according to their arrival time.

1.
FCFS Scheduling
First come first serve (FCFS) scheduling algorithm simply schedules the jobs 
according to their arrival time. The job which comes first in the ready queue will get 
the CPU first. The lesser the arrival time of the job, the sooner will the job get the 
CPU. FCFS scheduling may cause the problem of starvation if the burst time of the 
first process is the longest among all the jobs.
Advantages of FCFS
o
Simple
o
Easy
o
First come, First serve
Disadvantages of FCFS
1. The scheduling method is non preemptive, the process will run to the 
completion.
2. Due to the non-preemptive nature of the algorithm, the problem of starvation 
may occur.
3. Although it is easy to implement, but it is poor in performance since the 
average waiting time is higher as compare to other scheduling algorithms.
Example
Let's take an example of The FCFS scheduling algorithm. In the Following schedule, 
there are 5 processes with process ID P0, P1, P2, P3 and P4. P0 arrives at time 0, 
P1 at time 1, P2 at time 2, P3 arrives at time 3 and Process P4 arrives at time 4 in 
the ready queue. The processes and their respective Arrival and Burst time are given 
in the following table.
The Turnaround time and the waiting time are calculated by using the following 
formula.
1. Turn Around Time = Completion Time - Arrival Time   
2. Waiting Time = Turnaround time - Burst Time   
The average waiting Time is determined by summing the respective waiting time of 
all the processes and divided the sum by the total number of processes.

               Avg Waiting Time=31/5
             (Gantt chart)
Convoy Effect in FCFS
FCFS may suffer from the convoy effect if the burst time of the first job is the 
highest among all. As in the real life, if a convoy is passing through the road then 
the other persons may get blocked until it passes completely. This can be simulated 
in the Operating System also.
If the CPU gets the processes of the higher burst time at the front end of the ready 
queue then the processes of lower burst time may get blocked which means they 
may never get the CPU if the job in the execution has a very high burst time. This is 
called convoy effect or starvation.

Example
In the Example, We have 3 processes named as P1, P2 and P3. The Burt Time of 
process P1 is highest.
The Turnaround time and the waiting time in the following table, are calculated by 
the formula,
1. Turn Around Time = Completion Time - Arrival Time  
2.     Waiting Time = Turn Around Time - Burst Time   
In the First scenario, The Process P1 arrives at the first in the queue although; the 
burst time of the process is the highest among all. Since, the Scheduling algorithm, 
we are following is FCFS hence the CPU will execute the Process P1 first.
In this schedule, the average waiting time of the system will be very high. That is 
because of the convoy effect. The other processes P2, P3 have to wait for their turn 
for 40 units of time although their burst time is very low. This schedule suffers from 
starvation.
         Avg waiting Time = 81/3
In the Second scenario, If Process P1 would have arrived at the last of the queue 
and the other processes P2 and P3 at earlier then the problem of starvation would 
not be there.
Following example shows the deviation in the waiting times of both the scenarios. 
Although the length of the schedule is same that is 44 units but the waiting time will 
be lesser in this schedule.

         Avg Waiting Time=6/3
2. Shortest Job First (SJF) Scheduling
Till now, we were scheduling the processes according to their arrival time (in FCFS 
scheduling). However, SJF scheduling algorithm, schedules the processes according 
to their burst time.
In SJF scheduling, the process with the lowest burst time, among the list of available 
processes in the ready queue, is going to be scheduled next.
However, it is very difficult to predict the burst time needed for a process hence this 
algorithm is very difficult to implement in the system.
Advantages of SJF
1. Maximum throughput
2. Minimum average waiting and turnaround time
Disadvantages of SJF
1. May suffer with the problem of starvation
2. It is not implementable because the exact Burst time for a process can't be 
known in advance.
There are different techniques available by which, the CPU burst time of the process 
can be determined. We will discuss them later in detail.

Example
In the following example, there are five jobs named as P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5. Their 
arrival time and burst time are given in the table below.
Since, No Process arrives at time 0 hence; there will be an empty slot in the Gantt 
chart from time 0 to 1 (the time at which the first process arrives).
According to the algorithm, the OS schedules the process which is having the lowest 
burst time among the available processes in the ready queue.
Till now, we have only one process in the ready queue hence the scheduler will 
schedule this to the processor no matter what is its burst time.
This will be executed till 8 units of time. Till then we have three more processes 
arrived in the ready queue hence the scheduler will choose the process with the 
lowest burst time.
Among the processes given in the table, P3 will be executed next since it is having 
the lowest burst time among all the available processes.
So that's how the procedure will go on in shortest job first (SJF) scheduling 
algorithm.
         Avg Waiting Time = 27/5

3.
Round Robin Scheduling Algorithm
Round Robin scheduling algorithm is one of the most popular scheduling algorithm 
which can actually be implemented in most of the operating systems. This is 
the preemptive version of first come first serve scheduling. The Algorithm focuses 
on Time Sharing. In this algorithm, every process gets executed in a cyclic way. A 
certain time slice is defined in the system which is called time quantum. Each 
process present in the ready queue is assigned the CPU for that time quantum, if the 
execution of the process is completed during that time then the process 
will terminate else the process will go back to the ready queue and waits for the 
next turn to complete the execution.
Advantages
1. It can be actually implementable in the system because it is not depending on 
the burst time.
2. It doesn't suffer from the problem of starvation or convoy effect.
3. All the jobs get a fare allocation of CPU.

Disadvantages
1. The higher the time quantum, the higher the response time in the system.
2. The lower the time quantum, the higher the context switching overhead in 
the system.
3. Deciding a perfect time quantum is really a very difficult task in the system.
https://www.cs.uic.edu/~jbell/CourseNotes
/OperatingSystems/5_CPU_Scheduling.html
4.Shortest Remaining Time

Shortest remaining time (SRT) is the preemptive version of the SJN 
algorithm.

The processor is allocated to the job closest to completion but it can be 
preempted by a newer ready job with shorter time to completion.

Impossible to implement in interactive systems where required CPU time is 
not known.

It is often used in batch environments where short jobs need to give 
preference.

Example: Consider four processes with arrival time and burst time mentioned 
below in table.
Gantt chart: 

5.Priority Scheduling Algorithm 
Types of Priority Scheduling Algorithm
Priority scheduling can be of two types:
1. Preemptive Priority Scheduling: If the new process arrived at the ready 
queue has a higher priority than the currently running process, the CPU is 
preempted, which means the processing of the current process is stoped and 
the incoming new process with higher priority gets the CPU for its execution.
2. Non-Preemptive Priority Scheduling: In case of non-preemptive priority 
scheduling algorithm if a new process arrives with a higher priority than the 
current running process, the incoming process is put at the head of the ready 
queue, which means after the execution of the current process it will be 
processed.
Example of Priority Scheduling Algorithm

Consider the below table for processes with their respective CPU burst times and the 

priorities.

As you can see in the GANTT chart that the processes are given CPU time just on 
the basis of the priorities.
Problem with Priority Scheduling Algorithm
In priority scheduling algorithm, the chances of indefinite blocking or starvation.
A process is considered blocked when it is ready to run but has to wait for the CPU 
as some other process is running currently.
But in case of priority scheduling if new higher priority processes keeps coming in 
the ready queue then the processes waiting in the ready queue with lower priority 
may have to wait for long durations before getting the CPU for execution.
Threads
Definition: A thread is a path of execution within a process. A process can 
contain multiple threads.
There is a way of thread execution inside the process of any operating system. Apart 
from this, there can be more than one thread inside a process. Thread is often 
referred to as a lightweight process.

The process can be split down into so many threads. For example, in a browser, 
many tabs can be viewed as threads. MS Word uses many threads - formatting text 
from one thread, processing input from another thread, etc.
A thread is a flow of execution through the process code, with its own program 
counter that keeps track of which instruction to execute next, system registers which 
hold its current working variables, and a stack which contains the execution history.
A thread shares with its peer threads few information like code segment, data 
segment and open files. When one thread alters a code segment memory item, all 
other threads see that.
A thread is also called a lightweight process. Threads provide a way to improve 
application performance through parallelism. Threads represent a software 
approach to improving performance of operating system by reducing the overhead 
thread is equivalent to a classical process.
Each thread belongs to exactly one process and no thread can exist outside a 
process. Each thread represents a separate flow of control. Threads have been 
successfully used in implementing network servers and web server. They also 
provide a suitable foundation for parallel execution of applications on shared 
memory multiprocessors. The following figure shows the working of a single-
threaded and a multithreaded process.
Difference between Process and Thread
S.N.
Process
Thread

1
Process is heavy weight or resource 
intensive.
Thread is light weight, taking lesser resources 
than a process.
2
Process switching needs interaction 
with operating system.
Thread switching does not need to interact 
with operating system.
3
In multiple processing environments, 
each process executes the same 
code but has its own memory and 
file resources.
All threads can share same set of open files, 
child processes.
4
If one process is blocked, then no 
other process can execute until the 
first process is unblocked.
While one thread is blocked and waiting, a 
second thread in the same task can run.
5
Multiple processes without using 
threads use more resources.
Multiple threaded processes use fewer 
resources.
6
In multiple processes each process 
operates independently of the 
others.
One thread can read, write or change another 
thread's data.
Types of Threads
In the operating system, there are two types of threads.
1. Kernel level thread.
2. User-level thread.
User-level thread

The operating system does not recognize the user-level thread. User threads can be 
easily implemented and it is implemented by the user. If a user performs a user-
level thread blocking operation, the whole process is blocked. The kernel level 
thread does not know nothing about the user level thread. The kernel-level thread 
manages user-level threads as if they are single-threaded 
processes?examples: Java thread, POSIX threads, etc.
Advantages of User-level threads
1. The user threads can be easily implemented than the kernel thread.
2. User-level threads can be applied to such types of operating systems that do 
not support threads at the kernel-level.
3. It is faster and efficient.
4. Context switch time is shorter than the kernel-level threads.
5. It does not require modifications of the operating system.
6. User-level threads representation is very simple. The register, PC, stack, and 
mini thread control blocks are stored in the address space of the user-level 
process.
7. It is simple to create, switch, and synchronize threads without the 
intervention of the process.
Disadvantages of User-level threads

1. User-level threads lack coordination between the thread and the kernel.
2. If a thread causes a page fault, the entire process is blocked.
Kernel level thread
The kernel thread recognizes the operating system. There are a thread control block 
and process control block in the system for each thread and process in the kernel-
level thread. The kernel-level thread is implemented by the operating system. The 
kernel knows about all the threads and manages them. The kernel-level thread 
offers a system call to create and manage the threads from user-space. The 
implementation of kernel threads is difficult than the user thread. Context switch 
time is longer in the kernel thread. If a kernel thread performs a blocking operation, 
the Banky thread execution can continue. Example: Window Solaris.
Advantages of Kernel-level threads
1. The kernel-level thread is fully aware of all threads.
2. The scheduler may decide to spend more CPU time in the process of threads 
being large numerical.
3. The kernel-level thread is good for those applications that block the 
frequency.
Disadvantages of Kernel-level threads
1. The kernel thread manages and schedules all threads.
2. The implementation of kernel threads is difficult than the user thread.
3. The kernel-level thread is slower than user-level threads.
Difference between User-Level & Kernel-Level Thread
S.N.
User-Level Threads
Kernel-Level Thread
1
User-level threads are faster to create and 
manage.
Kernel-level threads are slower to 
create and manage.
2
Implementation is by a thread library at the user 
level.
Operating system supports creation of 
Kernel threads.
3
User-level thread is generic and can run on any 
operating system.
Kernel-level thread is specific to the 
operating system.

4
Multi-threaded applications cannot take 
advantage of multiprocessing.
Kernel routines themselves can be 
multithreaded.
Conept of Multithreading
Some operating system provide a combined user level thread and Kernel level 
thread facility. Solaris is a good example of this combined approach. In a combined 
system, multiple threads within the same application can run in parallel on multiple 
processors and a blocking system call need not block the entire process. 
Multithreading models are three types

Many to many relationship.

Many to one relationship.

One to one relationship.
Many to Many Model
The many-to-many model multiplexes any number of user threads onto an equal or 
smaller number of kernel threads.
The following diagram shows the many-to-many threading model where 6 user level 
threads are multiplexing with 6 kernel level threads. In this model, developers can 
create as many user threads as necessary and the corresponding Kernel threads 
can run in parallel on a multiprocessor machine. This model provides the best 
accuracy on concurrency and when a thread performs a blocking system call, the 
kernel can schedule another thread for execution.

Many to One Model
Many-to-one model maps many user level threads to one Kernel-level thread. 
Thread management is done in user space by the thread library. When thread 
makes a blocking system call, the entire process will be blocked. Only one thread 
can access the Kernel at a time, so multiple threads are unable to run in parallel on 
multiprocessors.
If the user-level thread libraries are implemented in the operating system in such a 
way that the system does not support them, then the Kernel threads use the many-
to-one relationship modes.

One to One Model
There is one-to-one relationship of user-level thread to the kernel-level thread. This 
model provides more concurrency than the many-to-one model. It also allows 
another thread to run when a thread makes a blocking system call. It supports 
multiple threads to execute in parallel on microprocessors.
Disadvantage of this model is that creating user thread requires the corresponding 
Kernel thread. OS/2, windows NT and windows 2000 use one to one relationship 
model.

